Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
skeletal muscle and the neuromuscular junction.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the structure of skeletal muscle down to the sarcomere.
Skeletal muscle is organised hierarchically.
A whole muscle is composed of bundles of muscle fibres; each fibre is a single,
large, multinucleate cell, containing within it many myofibrils.
The myofibril is made of repeating contractile units, the sarcomeres,
arranged end to end, which give skeletal muscle its striated appearance.
Each sarcomere lies between two Z-lines and contains overlapping thick and thin
filaments: the thick filaments are myosin, with projecting heads;
the thin filaments are actin, with the regulatory proteins troponin and tropomyosin.
The arrangement of these gives the banding seen microscopically.
Surrounding the myofibrils is the sarcoplasmic reticulum, a calcium store,
and the fibre membrane, the sarcolemma, dips into the fibre as transverse, or T,
tubules that carry the action potential into its depth.
So skeletal muscle runs from whole muscle to fibre to myofibril to sarcomere — the
sarcomere, between Z-lines, containing interdigitating myosin thick filaments and
actin thin filaments with troponin and tropomyosin,
surrounded by the calcium-storing sarcoplasmic reticulum and penetrated by
T-tubules — a structure built for contraction.
Describe the neuromuscular junction.
The neuromuscular junction is the specialised chemical synapse between a motor
nerve and a skeletal muscle fibre, where the nerve action potential triggers muscle
contraction. The motor nerve terminal lies in a depression of the muscle membrane,
separated by the synaptic cleft.
The presynaptic terminal contains vesicles of the neurotransmitter acetylcholine
and voltage-gated calcium channels.
The postsynaptic membrane, the motor end-plate,
is thrown into folds and densely studded with nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
which are ligand-gated cation channels;
the cleft contains the enzyme acetylcholinesterase.
Each nerve impulse normally releases far more acetylcholine than needed to trigger
a response — a safety margin.
So the neuromuscular junction is the chemical synapse between motor nerve and
muscle: a presynaptic terminal storing acetylcholine,
a synaptic cleft containing acetylcholinesterase,
and a folded postsynaptic end-plate rich in nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
structured with a large safety margin to convert the nerve impulse reliably into
muscle excitation — and the site of action of the neuromuscular blocking drugs.
Describe transmission at the neuromuscular junction.
Transmission proceeds in a sequence converting the nerve impulse into a muscle
action potential.
The motor nerve action potential reaches the terminal and opens voltage-gated
calcium channels; calcium enters and triggers the fusion of acetylcholine vesicles
with the membrane, releasing acetylcholine into the cleft by exocytosis.
The acetylcholine diffuses across and binds the nicotinic receptors on the
end-plate, opening their cation channels;
sodium enters and depolarises the end-plate, producing the end-plate potential.
Because of the large safety margin,
this potential readily reaches threshold and triggers an action potential in the
muscle membrane, which propagates along the sarcolemma and into the T-tubules.
The acetylcholine is then rapidly hydrolysed by acetylcholinesterase,
terminating the signal.
So neuromuscular transmission is: nerve action potential, calcium entry,
acetylcholine release, binding to nicotinic receptors opening cation channels,
an end-plate potential that reaches threshold to fire a muscle action potential,
and rapid termination by acetylcholinesterase — the reliable nerve-to-muscle relay
that neuromuscular blockers interrupt.
Describe excitation-contraction coupling.
Excitation-contraction coupling is the process linking the muscle action potential
to the mechanical contraction, through calcium.
The muscle action potential propagates along the sarcolemma and into the T-tubules,
carrying the depolarisation deep into the fibre.
In the T-tubule membrane lies a voltage sensor, the dihydropyridine receptor,
which is mechanically coupled to the calcium-release channel of the adjacent
sarcoplasmic reticulum, the ryanodine receptor.
The depolarisation, sensed by the dihydropyridine receptor,
opens the ryanodine receptor, and calcium floods out of the sarcoplasmic reticulum
into the cytoplasm.
The rise in cytoplasmic calcium is the trigger for contraction:
calcium binds troponin, moving tropomyosin to expose the binding sites on actin,
allowing the cross-bridge cycle.
So excitation-contraction coupling links the action potential to contraction by
calcium: the depolarisation travels down the T-tubules to the dihydropyridine
receptor, which triggers the ryanodine receptor to release calcium from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum, and that calcium initiates contraction — the ryanodine
receptor being the channel defective in malignant hyperthermia.
Describe the cross-bridge cycle and the sliding-filament mechanism.
Contraction occurs by the sliding-filament mechanism,
in which the thick and thin filaments slide past one another,
shortening the sarcomere without the filaments themselves shortening,
driven by the cross-bridge cycle.
When calcium exposes the binding sites on actin,
the energised myosin head binds actin to form a cross-bridge.
The head then pivots — the power stroke — pulling the thin filament towards the
centre of the sarcomere, and in doing so releases its bound adenosine diphosphate
and phosphate. A new molecule of adenosine triphosphate then binds the myosin head,
causing it to detach from actin.
The head hydrolyses this adenosine triphosphate,
re-energising and re-cocking itself, ready to bind again further along.
The cycle repeats as long as calcium and adenosine triphosphate are present,
ratcheting the filaments past each other.
So the cross-bridge cycle — myosin binding actin, the power stroke,
detachment on adenosine triphosphate binding,
and re-energising by its hydrolysis — drives the sliding-filament shortening of the
sarcomere, requiring both calcium to expose the binding sites and adenosine
triphosphate to power and reset the heads.
How does the muscle relax?
Relaxation requires the removal of the trigger for contraction — the cytoplasmic
calcium — and the cessation of the cross-bridge cycle.
When the stimulation stops and the action potentials cease,
calcium is no longer released, and it is actively pumped back into the sarcoplasmic
reticulum by a calcium ATPase, the SERCA pump,
which uses adenosine triphosphate to lower the cytoplasmic calcium.
As the calcium falls, it dissociates from troponin;
tropomyosin moves back to cover the binding sites on actin;
the cross-bridges can no longer form; and the filaments slide back passively,
lengthening the sarcomere, so the muscle relaxes.
Relaxation is therefore an active, energy-requiring process,
needing adenosine triphosphate to pump the calcium away — which is why energy
depletion impairs relaxation, as in rigor.
So muscle relaxes when calcium release ceases and the SERCA pump actively returns
calcium to the sarcoplasmic reticulum, so that calcium leaves troponin,
tropomyosin re-covers the actin sites, cross-bridges cannot form,
and the filaments slide back — an active, adenosine-triphosphate-requiring process.
Describe the motor unit and skeletal muscle fibre types.
A motor unit is a single motor neurone together with all the muscle fibres it
innervates, the functional unit of contraction;
its size varies with the precision required — small units of a few fibres in
muscles needing fine control, such as the extraocular muscles,
and large units of many fibres in powerful postural muscles.
The force of contraction is graded by recruiting more motor units and by increasing
their firing frequency.
Skeletal muscle fibres are of types suited to different work: slow, type one,
oxidative fibres are fatigue-resistant, rich in mitochondria and myoglobin,
suited to sustained postural activity; fast, type two, fibres generate rapid,
powerful contractions but fatigue more readily,
with subtypes more oxidative or glycolytic.
So a motor unit is a motor neurone and all the fibres it supplies — small for fine
control, large for power — and force is graded by recruitment and firing rate;
the fibres are slow oxidative fatigue-resistant type one or fast type two suited to
rapid powerful effort, matching muscle to its functional demands.
What is the relevance of muscle physiology to anaesthesia?
Muscle physiology is highly relevant to anaesthesia.
The neuromuscular junction is the target of the neuromuscular blocking drugs:
the depolarising blocker suxamethonium acts as an agonist,
causing persistent depolarisation and initial fasciculation then block,
while the non-depolarising blockers competitively antagonise the nicotinic
receptor; both are monitored by nerve stimulation and the non-depolarising block is
reversed by anticholinesterases or sugammadex.
Excitation-contraction coupling and the ryanodine receptor are central to malignant
hyperthermia, in which a receptor abnormality causes uncontrolled calcium release,
sustained contraction and hypermetabolism,
triggered by volatile agents and suxamethonium and treated with dantrolene.
Disorders such as myasthenia gravis, affecting the receptor,
alter the response to blockers.
So muscle physiology is directly relevant to anaesthesia through neuromuscular
blockade at the junction and its monitoring and reversal,
through the ryanodine receptor in malignant hyperthermia,
and through neuromuscular diseases that alter drug responses — the junction and the
contractile apparatus being key sites of anaesthetic action and pathology.
Pull it together: trace the events from motor nerve impulse to muscle contraction
and relaxation.
I would trace the whole sequence.
A motor nerve action potential reaches the neuromuscular junction and,
through calcium entry, releases acetylcholine,
which binds nicotinic receptors to produce an end-plate potential that,
with its large safety margin, fires a muscle action potential.
This propagates along the sarcolemma and into the T-tubules,
where the dihydropyridine receptor triggers the ryanodine receptor to release
calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum — excitation-contraction coupling.
The calcium binds troponin, moving tropomyosin to expose actin,
and the cross-bridge cycle of myosin binding, the power stroke,
detachment and re-energising, powered by adenosine triphosphate,
slides the filaments to shorten the sarcomere.
When stimulation ceases, the SERCA pump returns calcium to the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, the binding sites are re-covered, and the muscle relaxes.
So from nerve impulse to contraction:
junctional transmission fires a muscle action potential,
T-tubular depolarisation releases calcium via the ryanodine receptor,
calcium enables the adenosine-triphosphate-powered cross-bridge cycle to shorten
the sarcomere, and active calcium reuptake then relaxes the muscle — an integrated
electrochemical-to-mechanical sequence and a major site of anaesthetic action.
Describe the length-tension relationship of skeletal muscle.
The length-tension relationship describes how the force a muscle can generate
depends on its length at the time of stimulation,
and it follows directly from the sliding-filament mechanism.
Plotted as the active tension developed on the vertical axis against the muscle,
or sarcomere, length on the horizontal axis,
the curve rises to a peak at an optimal length and falls off on either side.
At the optimal length there is maximal overlap between the actin and myosin
filaments, so the greatest number of cross-bridges can form and tension is greatest.
If the muscle is stretched beyond this,
the overlap and so the number of possible cross-bridges fall, reducing tension;
if it is shortened below the optimum,
the filaments overlap excessively and interfere, again reducing tension.
This is the basis, in the heart, of the Frank-Starling relationship.
So the length-tension relationship is an inverted-U curve peaking at the optimal
length, where filament overlap and cross-bridge formation are maximal,
and falling with over-stretch or over-shortening as overlap is lost or filaments
interfere — a direct consequence of the sliding-filament mechanism,
and the cellular basis of Starling's law of the heart.
Describe the force-velocity relationship.
The force-velocity relationship describes how the velocity at which a muscle
shortens depends on the load it works against.
Plotted as the velocity of shortening on the vertical axis against the load,
or force, on the horizontal axis, the relationship is a curve that falls steeply:
at zero load the muscle shortens at its maximum velocity,
and as the load increases the velocity of shortening falls,
until at a maximal load the muscle cannot shorten at all and the velocity is zero —
an isometric contraction.
The curve is hyperbolic. The explanation lies in the cross-bridge cycle:
a heavier load slows the cycling of the cross-bridges,
so the filaments slide more slowly. The relationship also means power,
the product of force and velocity, is maximal at an intermediate load.
So the force-velocity relationship is a falling hyperbolic curve:
shortening velocity is greatest at zero load and falls to zero at the maximal
isometric load, because heavier loads slow cross-bridge cycling,
with power output greatest at an intermediate load — a fundamental property of
contracting muscle.
Distinguish isometric and isotonic contraction, and describe summation and tetanus.
Muscle contractions are described by what changes.
In an isometric contraction the muscle develops tension but does not change length,
because the load equals or exceeds the force generated — as in postural muscles
holding a position.
In an isotonic contraction the muscle shortens against a constant load,
doing external work — as in lifting. As for the temporal pattern,
a single brief stimulus produces a single twitch.
If stimuli are repeated before the muscle has fully relaxed,
the individual twitches sum to produce greater tension — summation.
As the frequency of stimulation rises, the twitches fuse:
at moderate frequencies an unfused, or incomplete, tetanus with some oscillation,
and at high frequencies a smooth, sustained, maximal contraction — a fused,
complete tetanus. Most normal movements use tetanic contraction.
So an isometric contraction develops tension without shortening and an isotonic one
shortens against a constant load; repeated stimulation causes summation of
twitches, fusing at high frequency into a smooth tetanic contraction — the normal
mode of forceful, sustained contraction.
Describe the motor-unit size principle and the grading of contractile force.
The force of a whole muscle's contraction is graded smoothly by two mechanisms.
The first is the recruitment of motor units — bringing more motor units into action
increases force.
This recruitment follows the size principle: the smaller motor units,
with smaller motor neurones and fewer, slow fibres, are recruited first, for fine,
low-force control, and progressively larger units, with larger neurones and more,
fast, powerful fibres, are recruited as more force is required.
This orderly recruitment gives smooth, graded increases and reserves the powerful,
fatigable units for when they are needed. The second mechanism is rate coding —
increasing the firing frequency of the active motor units,
summing twitches towards tetanus to increase their force.
So contractile force is graded by recruiting more motor units,
in order of increasing size by the size principle — small fine-control units first,
large powerful ones last — and by increasing their firing rate,
the two together allowing smooth control from delicate to maximal effort.
What are the energy sources for muscle contraction, and what causes fatigue?
Muscle contraction is powered by adenosine triphosphate,
which the fibre stores in only tiny amounts,
so it must be regenerated continuously by several systems with different speeds and
capacities.
The immediate source is creatine phosphate,
which rapidly rephosphorylates adenosine diphosphate to provide a few seconds of
maximal effort.
For sustained intense activity, anaerobic glycolysis breaks down glucose and
glycogen to lactate, providing energy quickly but with limited capacity and
accumulating lactate.
For prolonged activity, oxidative phosphorylation in the mitochondria,
using glucose and fatty acids, provides the bulk of the energy aerobically,
limited by oxygen supply.
Fatigue — the decline in force with sustained activity — arises from several
causes: depletion of substrates such as glycogen and creatine phosphate,
accumulation of metabolites including inorganic phosphate and hydrogen ions,
and impaired calcium handling, with a central component reducing drive.
So muscle is powered by adenosine triphosphate regenerated by creatine phosphate
for immediate effort, anaerobic glycolysis for short intense effort,
and oxidative phosphorylation for sustained effort;
fatigue results from substrate depletion,
metabolite accumulation and impaired calcium handling, with a central component.
Compare depolarising and non-depolarising neuromuscular block.
The two classes of neuromuscular blocker act differently at the nicotinic receptor.
The depolarising blocker, suxamethonium, is an agonist:
it binds and activates the receptor like acetylcholine, but,
not being broken down by acetylcholinesterase, it persists,
causing a sustained depolarisation of the end-plate;
after initial fasciculation the end-plate remains depolarised and cannot respond to
further acetylcholine, so transmission is blocked — a phase-one block,
characterised by fasciculations, the absence of fade and of post-tetanic
potentiation on monitoring, and augmentation by anticholinesterases.
The non-depolarising blockers are competitive antagonists:
they bind the receptor without activating it, blocking acetylcholine from acting;
their block shows fade on repeated or tetanic stimulation and post-tetanic
potentiation, and is reversed by anticholinesterases,
which raise acetylcholine to compete, or by sugammadex, which encapsulates the drug.
So depolarising block by suxamethonium is persistent agonism causing
depolarisation, with fasciculations and no fade,
while non-depolarising block is competitive antagonism showing fade and
post-tetanic potentiation and reversible by anticholinesterases or sugammadex — a
fundamental pharmacological distinction monitored at the neuromuscular junction.
How is neuromuscular block monitored?
Neuromuscular block is monitored by stimulating a peripheral motor nerve
electrically and observing or measuring the evoked muscle response,
which assesses the depth of block and guides dosing and confirms adequate reversal.
The common pattern is the train-of-four:
four supramaximal stimuli are delivered over two seconds,
and the responses compared.
With a non-depolarising block, the responses progressively diminish — fade — and
the ratio of the fourth to the first response, the train-of-four ratio,
quantifies the block, recovery to a ratio above ninety per cent indicating adequate
reversal for safe extubation.
The count of responses indicates deeper levels.
Other patterns include tetanic stimulation with post-tetanic count for deep block,
and the double-burst stimulation. A depolarising phase-one block shows reduced but
equal responses without fade.
So neuromuscular block is monitored by peripheral nerve stimulation,
chiefly the train-of-four, the fade and the train-of-four ratio quantifying
non-depolarising block and confirming adequate recovery,
with post-tetanic count for deep block — objective monitoring being essential to
safe use and reversal of the blockers.
Describe malignant hyperthermia at the cellular level.
Malignant hyperthermia is a rare, inherited disorder of skeletal muscle in which
exposure to triggering anaesthetic agents — the volatile agents and suxamethonium —
precipitates a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis,
and its basis lies in the calcium-release machinery of excitation-contraction
coupling.
The defect, most often a mutation in the gene for the ryanodine receptor,
the calcium-release channel of the sarcoplasmic reticulum,
makes the channel abnormally sensitive,
so that the triggering agents cause it to release calcium uncontrollably into the
cytoplasm.
The sustained high cytoplasmic calcium drives continuous,
uncontrolled muscle contraction and the relentless activity of the calcium pumps
attempting to remove it, all consuming adenosine triphosphate and oxygen at a vast
rate — producing the hypermetabolism: rising carbon dioxide, heat, acidosis,
hyperkalaemia, and muscle rigidity and breakdown.
The specific treatment, dantrolene,
acts on the ryanodine receptor to stop the calcium release.
So malignant hyperthermia is an inherited ryanodine-receptor abnormality causing
triggered, uncontrolled sarcoplasmic-reticulum calcium release,
driving sustained contraction and a hypermetabolic crisis,
treated with dantrolene — a cellular disorder of excitation-contraction coupling
with grave anaesthetic significance.
Compare skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscle.
The three muscle types share the actin-myosin contractile mechanism but differ in
structure and control.
Skeletal muscle is striated, multinucleate and under voluntary,
somatic nervous control; it contracts and relaxes rapidly,
with calcium released from the sarcoplasmic reticulum binding troponin,
and it does not normally contract spontaneously.
Cardiac muscle is also striated but its cells are single-nucleate,
branched and joined by intercalated discs with gap junctions,
so it behaves as a functional syncytium conducting excitation cell to cell;
it is myogenic and involuntary, its contraction triggered by calcium-induced
calcium release and modulated by the autonomic system,
and it cannot be tetanised owing to its long refractory period.
Smooth muscle, in vessels and viscera, is non-striated,
single-nucleate and involuntary, contracting slowly and sustainedly;
its calcium acts through calmodulin and myosin light-chain kinase rather than
troponin, and it is controlled by autonomic, hormonal and local factors.
So skeletal muscle is striated, voluntary and troponin-controlled;
cardiac muscle is a striated, myogenic syncytium using calcium-induced calcium
release and unable to tetanise; and smooth muscle is non-striated,
involuntary and calmodulin-controlled — a comparison central to physiology.
Describe the muscle spindle and its role in proprioception.
The muscle spindle is the sensory receptor that detects muscle length and its rate
of change, essential to proprioception and to the control of movement and posture.
It consists of specialised intrafusal muscle fibres enclosed in a capsule,
lying in parallel among the ordinary extrafusal fibres,
and supplied by sensory endings that wrap around them.
When the muscle is stretched, the spindle is stretched,
and its sensory endings increase their firing,
signalling the muscle's length and the speed of stretch to the central nervous
system.
This is the afferent limb of the stretch reflex,
in which stretch reflexly excites the muscle to contract and resist the stretch —
the basis of the tendon jerks and of postural tone.
The spindle's sensitivity is itself adjustable:
gamma motor neurones contract the ends of the intrafusal fibres to keep the spindle
taut across a range of muscle lengths.
So the muscle spindle is a parallel,
capsule-enclosed length and stretch-velocity receptor,
the afferent of the stretch reflex and the basis of proprioception and postural
tone, its sensitivity set by gamma motor neurones — a key element of motor control.
Describe the Golgi tendon organ.
The Golgi tendon organ is the sensory receptor that detects muscle tension,
complementing the spindle's detection of length.
It lies in the tendon, in series with the muscle fibres,
so that it is stretched and excited by the tension the muscle generates,
whether by active contraction or passive stretch — unlike the spindle, in parallel,
which is unloaded by contraction.
Its afferent signals the force being developed.
Through an inhibitory interneurone it mediates a reflex that,
when tension becomes very high, inhibits the muscle's own contraction — the inverse
stretch reflex — traditionally regarded as protective against excessive force,
though it also contributes to the moment-to-moment regulation of muscle tension.
So the Golgi tendon organ is a tension receptor lying in series in the tendon,
excited by the force the muscle develops,
mediating an inhibitory reflex that regulates and limits muscle tension — working
with the muscle spindle, which detects length,
to give the nervous system complete proprioceptive information on both the length
and the force of muscles.
What happens to muscle after denervation?
When a muscle loses its motor nerve supply, it undergoes characteristic changes.
Deprived of the trophic and activating influence of the nerve,
it can no longer be voluntarily activated and undergoes progressive denervation
atrophy, wasting over weeks.
It develops abnormal spontaneous electrical activity — fibrillation.
Importantly, the acetylcholine receptors, normally confined to the end-plate,
spread to cover the whole muscle membrane — extrajunctional receptor proliferation,
a form of denervation supersensitivity.
This receptor up-regulation has a dangerous anaesthetic consequence:
administering the depolarising blocker suxamethonium to such a patient causes a
massive efflux of potassium from the many receptors as they are activated,
producing life-threatening hyperkalaemia.
The same risk follows other states of receptor up-regulation,
such as prolonged immobility, burns and spinal injury.
So after denervation a muscle atrophies, fibrillates,
and proliferates extrajunctional acetylcholine receptors — denervation
supersensitivity — which makes suxamethonium dangerous through massive potassium
release; a risk shared by burns, immobility and spinal injury,
and a key anaesthetic concern.
Describe excitation-contraction coupling in cardiac muscle and how it differs from
skeletal.
Cardiac muscle, like skeletal, links its action potential to contraction through a
rise in cytoplasmic calcium, but the mechanism differs in an important respect.
In cardiac muscle the action potential,
propagating along the sarcolemma and T-tubules,
has a prolonged plateau during which voltage-gated calcium channels open and a
quantity of calcium enters the cell from outside.
This entering calcium is itself the trigger:
it acts on the ryanodine receptors of the sarcoplasmic reticulum to cause them to
release a much larger store of calcium — the process of calcium-induced calcium
release.
The combined calcium then drives contraction as in skeletal muscle.
This contrasts with skeletal muscle, where the T-tubular voltage sensor,
the dihydropyridine receptor, triggers the ryanodine receptor directly by
mechanical coupling, with little dependence on extracellular calcium.
Consequently cardiac contraction depends on extracellular calcium and is gradable,
whereas skeletal is all-or-none per fibre.
So cardiac excitation-contraction coupling works by calcium-induced calcium release
— calcium entering during the action potential triggering further release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum — making it dependent on extracellular calcium,
unlike the direct mechanical triggering of skeletal muscle.
Describe smooth muscle contraction and how it is regulated.
Smooth muscle, in the walls of vessels and hollow viscera,
contracts by the same sliding of actin and myosin but is regulated quite
differently from striated muscle, lacking troponin and the striated arrangement.
Its contraction is triggered by a rise in cytoplasmic calcium,
which enters from outside and from stores,
but the calcium acts by binding the protein calmodulin;
the calcium-calmodulin complex then activates the enzyme myosin light-chain kinase,
which phosphorylates the myosin to enable cross-bridge cycling.
Relaxation follows when calcium falls and myosin light-chain phosphatase
dephosphorylates the myosin.
Smooth muscle contracts slowly and can sustain tension economically — the latch
state — and is controlled not by somatic nerves but by autonomic nerves,
circulating hormones, and local chemical and stretch stimuli,
some types being spontaneously active.
So smooth muscle contracts when calcium binds calmodulin to activate myosin
light-chain kinase, phosphorylating myosin,
and relaxes when phosphatase reverses this;
it contracts slowly and economically with a latch state,
and is regulated by autonomic, hormonal and local influences — a calmodulin-based
mechanism contrasting with the troponin system of striated muscle.
Describe the safety margin of neuromuscular transmission and its loss in myasthenia
gravis.
Neuromuscular transmission normally has a large safety margin:
each nerve impulse releases far more acetylcholine,
and the end-plate has far more receptors,
than the minimum needed to depolarise the membrane to threshold,
so transmission is highly reliable and one nerve impulse faithfully produces one
muscle action potential.
This margin means that a substantial proportion of receptors can be lost or blocked
before transmission begins to fail.
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease in which antibodies destroy and block
the postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine receptors,
reducing their number and eroding the safety margin;
transmission then fails intermittently, especially with repeated activity,
causing the characteristic fatigable weakness and a decremental response on
repetitive nerve stimulation.
These patients are resistant to depolarising and sensitive to non-depolarising
blockers.
So neuromuscular transmission has a large safety margin from excess acetylcholine
and receptors, ensuring reliability; in myasthenia gravis,
autoimmune loss of receptors erodes this margin,
causing fatigable weakness and a decremental response,
and altering the response to neuromuscular blockers — a clinically important
disorder of the junction.
What are the energy stores and recovery processes after intense muscle activity?
Intense muscle activity rapidly draws on the muscle's energy stores and incurs an
oxygen debt that must be repaid during recovery.
During the effort, the immediate adenosine triphosphate is supplemented first by
creatine phosphate and then increasingly by anaerobic glycolysis,
which produces lactate when the demand outstrips the oxygen supply.
During recovery, oxygen consumption remains elevated above rest — the excess
post-exercise oxygen consumption, or oxygen debt — to restore the system:
oxygen is used to regenerate adenosine triphosphate and creatine phosphate,
to convert the accumulated lactate back to glucose or oxidise it,
and to replenish the oxygen bound to myoglobin and haemoglobin.
The lactate is largely taken up by the liver and reconverted to glucose.
So intense activity depletes adenosine triphosphate and creatine phosphate and
generates lactate through anaerobic glycolysis,
incurring an oxygen debt that is repaid in recovery by elevated oxygen consumption
— regenerating the phosphate stores, clearing lactate,
and replenishing oxygen — the basis of the breathlessness that persists after
exertion and relevant to metabolic demand in the perioperative period.
Summarise the integrated control of skeletal muscle in movement.
I would summarise it as a hierarchy of control acting on the final common path of
the motor neurone.
Movement is commanded from the motor cortex and coordinated by the basal ganglia
and cerebellum, the descending pathways converging, with reflex and sensory inputs,
on the alpha motor neurones of the spinal cord — the final common path — each of
which, with the fibres it supplies, forms a motor unit.
Force is graded by recruiting motor units in order of size and by rate coding.
The command is executed at the neuromuscular junction,
reliably because of its safety margin, triggering the muscle action potential,
excitation-contraction coupling through calcium release,
and the cross-bridge cycle that shortens the sarcomere.
Continuous proprioceptive feedback from muscle spindles and tendon organs informs
and adjusts the movement through reflexes.
So skeletal muscle is controlled by a hierarchy — cortex,
basal ganglia and cerebellum — acting through the motor neurone final common path
and the motor unit, with force graded by recruitment and rate,
executed at the safety-margined junction,
and continuously refined by proprioceptive feedback — an integrated system from
intention to coordinated movement.
What is rigor mortis, and what does it reveal about the cross-bridge cycle?
Rigor mortis is the stiffening of the muscles that develops some hours after death,
and it is instructive because it reveals the absolute requirement of muscle
relaxation for adenosine triphosphate.
In the living muscle, the detachment of the myosin head from actin at the end of
each cross-bridge cycle requires a fresh molecule of adenosine triphosphate to bind
the head; relaxation likewise requires adenosine triphosphate to pump calcium back
into the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
After death, the production of adenosine triphosphate ceases,
and as the existing stores are exhausted, two things happen:
calcium leaks into the cytoplasm and is no longer pumped away,
so the cross-bridges form; and, with no adenosine triphosphate to bind the myosin
heads, they cannot detach, so the cross-bridges lock the filaments together,
producing the rigidity.
It resolves later as the proteins themselves degrade.
So rigor mortis is the post-mortem rigidity caused by the loss of adenosine
triphosphate: calcium accumulates and cross-bridges form,
but without adenosine triphosphate the myosin heads cannot detach and so lock —
demonstrating that adenosine triphosphate is required not to form but to break the
cross-bridge, and that relaxation is an active, energy-requiring process.
Distinguish single-unit and multi-unit smooth muscle.
Smooth muscle is classified into two functional types according to how its cells
are coupled and controlled.
Single-unit, or visceral, smooth muscle — the commoner type,
in the walls of the gut, the ureters,
the bladder and small vessels — has its cells electrically coupled by gap
junctions, so they are excited together and contract as a single coordinated unit,
often showing spontaneous, rhythmic, myogenic activity from pacemaker regions,
modulated by autonomic nerves, hormones and stretch.
Multi-unit smooth muscle — as in the iris,
the ciliary muscle and the larger airways and arteries — consists of cells that are
not extensively coupled, each more independently innervated, allowing finer,
graded control of contraction by the nervous system, without spontaneous activity.
So single-unit smooth muscle is gap-junction-coupled and contracts as a
coordinated, often spontaneously rhythmic syncytium, as in the gut and bladder,
whereas multi-unit smooth muscle has independently innervated cells allowing fine
graded control, as in the iris and ciliary muscle — the coupling determining
whether the muscle acts in unison or under discrete control.
Distinguish phase I and phase II depolarising block.
With the depolarising blocker suxamethonium,
the character of the block can change with dose and time,
from a phase-one to a phase-two block.
The phase-one block is the typical depolarising block:
the persistent agonist keeps the end-plate depolarised,
and on monitoring it shows reduced but well-sustained responses without fade to
train-of-four or tetanic stimulation, no post-tetanic potentiation,
and augmentation by anticholinesterases.
With large or repeated doses, or a prolonged infusion,
the block gradually changes its character to a phase-two, or dual, block:
although the drug is still a depolarising agent,
the end-plate membrane develops desensitisation and the block comes to resemble a
non-depolarising one — now showing fade and post-tetanic potentiation on
monitoring, and becoming at least partly reversible by anticholinesterases.
So a phase-one depolarising block shows sustained responses without fade and is
augmented by anticholinesterases, whereas with excessive or prolonged suxamethonium
it converts to a phase-two block resembling non-depolarising blockade,
with fade and post-tetanic potentiation — a change in character important to
recognise when monitoring.
Thank you. A clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Skeletal muscle is organised muscle → fibre (a multinucleate cell) →
myofibril → sarcomere; the sarcomere (between Z-lines) contains interdigitating
myosin thick and actin thin filaments with troponin and tropomyosin,
surrounded by the calcium-storing sarcoplasmic reticulum and penetrated by
T-tubules.
2.
The neuromuscular junction is the motor nerve–muscle chemical synapse — presynaptic
acetylcholine vesicles, a cleft with acetylcholinesterase,
and a folded end-plate rich in nicotinic (cation-channel) receptors with a large
safety margin; transmission: nerve AP → calcium entry → acetylcholine release →
nicotinic binding → end-plate potential → muscle AP → acetylcholinesterase
termination.
Second, Excitation-contraction coupling links AP to contraction via calcium:
the AP travels down the T-tubules to the dihydropyridine receptor,
which triggers the ryanodine receptor to release calcium from the sarcoplasmic
reticulum; calcium binds troponin, moving tropomyosin to expose actin — the
ryanodine receptor being defective in malignant hyperthermia.
Third, Contraction is by sliding filaments driven by the cross-bridge cycle (myosin
binds actin → power stroke → detachment on ATP binding → re-energising by ATP
hydrolysis), needing calcium and ATP;
relaxation is active — the SERCA pump returns calcium to the sarcoplasmic
reticulum, tropomyosin re-covers actin, and filaments slide back;
force is graded by motor-unit recruitment and firing rate (slow type 1 vs fast type
2 fibres).
Fourth, Muscle physiology is central to anaesthesia:
the NMJ is the target of neuromuscular blockers (depolarising suxamethonium
agonist; non-depolarising competitive antagonists),
monitored by nerve stimulation and reversed by anticholinesterases or sugammadex;
the ryanodine receptor underlies
Thank you. That concludes the station.